CT436 Business Ethics
Student: Alexandra McElhinney	
Student ID: 12437802

Essay Title: What levels of personal privacy should individuals have on the internet and why? What ethical responsibility do I.T. companies have to respect individuals’ privacy?

Privacy is defined as ‘The state or condition of being alone, undisturbed, or free from public attention, as a matter of choice or right.’ [1] Irregardless of where a person might be, depending on town, country, work position, at home, or on the street, privacy is a fundamental right. This should be just as true for people online. In this essay, I will look at how privacy is regarded in modern society, as well as what to expect from it in the future. I will also investigate privacy in I.T. companies and what they should, or maybe shouldn’t do for the sake of privacy.
There are many levels of privacy once you hit the internet. Casual users can chose not to achieve full anonymity. Is such a thing even possible anymore? Users of popular social media sites readily submit things like their name, age, location without really a thought. It’s a pretty common standard. One assumes the data is safe wherever they may have put it. You can upload your photos that you took from the weekend, or let everyone know how excited you are for your holiday in two weeks. You can find fun and informative “You’ll never guess what this housewife did….” articles. The internet has grown into this mass of data that no one really questions anymore on a daily basis, much less what sort of impact they may have on it. 
The Right to Privacy[2] was an article written by Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis in 1890 as part of the Harvard Law review. It was seen as the most influential source of privacy as a part of American legal culture.[3] It is also stated as part of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, under article 12, stated as  “No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honor and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.”[4]
In the 1970s there were a number of changes made to US law in regards to privacy, mostly prompted, directly or indirectly, by the Watergate scandal and subsequent wiretapping, recording and surveillance. The 1974, the US Congress passed the privacy acts, which restricts government agencies from gathering information on an individual. Similarly Congress passed a Freedom of Information Act, which meant that U.S. federal government could not withhold information from the general public by marking the information as secret. In ‘78 a Foreign Surveillance Act was passed, which meant that government agencies could carry out surveillance on individuals accused of espionage. [5]
There was this constant battle between government agencies to take and withhold information on people, and allowing the general public to view this information if it offered no harm to an individual. Privacy has been an entire battle in the past and little has changed as the world moved into the twenty-first century, and as technology became the core of our lifestyles. This all meant that data was easier to come by. People were as ignorant in the technological age to protect themselves as they had been prior to the internet and the development of various systems built to capture a user's information.
HTTP cookies are small files that can be gathered by a website or browser that holds certain information about the user and what did searched or clicked at a particular time. These small files are used to target specific adverts at users, to generate more articles that they may also be interested in, the track their searches in travel websites such as Ryanair, Aer Lingus, or for hotels, ferry journeys, etc. Suddenly, your information is not so private. These bits or data are carried and held by every browser on every PC. For the most part, they’re harmless. After all, they may only be used to get a bit more money out of you when you’re booking your flights, or to get you to invest in ads. These are easily removeable and preventable as browser’s offer, deep within their setting to turn them off. 
Then there’s Evercookies[6]. Developed by Samy Kamkar in 2010, these are similar to HTTP cookies, but like a zombie version. These are persistent, ‘re-animating’ cookies that stick around on your system despite a user deleting and removing their cookies. Suddenly, cookies are not so harmless. As cited by the well known NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden, evercookies were used in tracking users on the social communication site, Tor. That’s what cookies are all about; tracking users. Though mostly used harmlessly, they’re ability can clearly be abused by pretty much anyone.
There are multiple ways for users to have their supposedly private information exploited. Phishing is a method of acquiring people’s usernames, passwords, credit card details, etc. by posing as a trustworthy source. Sometimes, people are not careful enough with the information they do have and can actually give this sort of information out without thinking of the consequences. 
In 2013, the previous CIA employee, Edward Snowden, fled to Hong Kong. Shortly after he released sensitive information about his current employer the National Security Agency. Snowden named multiple companies and sites that essentially ‘sold’ their users’ private data to the NSA. Various media outlets, such as the Washington Post, The New York Times, The Guardian, and Le Monde, among various others, obtained and published multiple documents in the following months. This was the first major sign of a global privacy infringement the world had seen and such lead to the outrage and suspicion of the general public. It was the first sign of government spying.
Google has been a small concern to many people out there, as it quite possibly has the most amount of data on individuals. Between email accounts, web searches, YouTube accounts and Google+, the servers are loaded with people’s information. One assumes that their posts(whether it be comments, document, photos) are their own and merely hosted the the big Google. This is your own, and not Google’s to modify or do with what they please. That’s the basis of owning something. This however does not stop the large amount of controversy surrounding Google and the idea it ‘sells’ people’s information. Google’s apparent plan however is to organise the world’s data. Which, of course, includes collecting it all first. [7] It’s an uneasy thought to know that Google could potentially store the data of every person that has ever used their site. Currently there are 1.17 billion people using Google. 
Other contenders in the ‘invasion’ of privacy include the well known social network, first created by Mark Zuckerberg and launched February 4th 2004. Facebook has on average 1.44 billion active users per month. This was another site cited by Edward Snowden in his statement on NSA, stating that ‘the company allowed the US National Security Agency to access user data via its PRISM covert surveillance programme.’[8] This lead to major concerns for the public, as user became more concerned over what rights they really had to privacy. Since, the founder has denied any involvement with the NSA, but has since some out with new privacy policies. Facebook’s global deputy chief privacy officer Stephen Deadman stated that Facebook is “a business that is basically built on trust. We know we have to maintain that trust.”[8]
	Looking from the other side, what ethical right does an I.T. company have to maintain privacy? People so easily, and willing give out sensitive information. In 2015, a large attack was made on the ‘affair dating’ website, Ashley Madison, where users joined in an attempt to seek other individuals within marriages who wished to move outside of them. User’s of course supplied their information, and messaged other users. The attack was initially done in an attempt to shut down the infamous website, along with its sister site “Established Men”. Being such a privacy centered site, because in the end no one wants to get caught in an affair, the site offered users the chance to completely ‘nuke’ their profiles, wiping any trace that they had existed there to begin with. However, come the attack by a team known as The Impact Team, they were able to gather any and all information on previous users despite having supposedly wiped their profiles. This was a huge blow to the website. In the end, roughly 32 million users were outed. This was a major breach in privacy. Despite guaranteeing a total wipe of users, Ashley Madison has apparently held on to this information. It was never used in anything, but merely stored on the servers collecting dust. It had lost trust, and the users had lost trust in their spouses. The overall hack had damaged many people’s lives. Pasts were dug up and put out for all to see. The hack can be both seen as the fault of Ashley Madison, for not keeping to what it had promised millions of users, but also the hackers, who decided to release this information to the public.
	In the Forbes article, Privacy Is Completely and Utterly Dead, and We Killed It, author Jacob Morgan speaks about how important is privacy as we move forward. “Everyone keeps talking about it and apparently everyone is concerned with it…”[8] but no one seems to make the active measures it takes to protect themselves. Before people join just about anything, there is a Terms and Conditions, which can be safely assumed no one reads. It’s pretty long, and no one has that time. People are essentially signing away their privacy, then demanding more without realising what they have done to begin with. It’s a constant thing to allow third party companies to access our data on various apps, as most give an option to simply sign up with your Facebook or Google account. Privacy is a thing, people stop paying attention to until it gets bad, e.g. the NSA blow out.[9]
	I feel I.T. companies should protect their users. It all comes down to trust. To keep a user, a company  must prove that they can be trusted, by having a waterproof privacy policy, by destroying data when it truly claims to, by not seeking to maker as much money as possible by selling information to advertising companies. Everyone has the right to feel safe and protected when they put themselves out onto something where they don’t 100% know what is going to happen. Every company allows for protection of it users. A privacy policy is regularly updated by sites such as Google and Facebook and a user will always be notified of these changes and encourages to read them and understand them. Steps are taken to ensure a user’s information is protected. Users need to care about it and fully endorse the ideas of privacy and their fundamental right to it.
	The only time a person’s privacy should be invaded is in the cases where they may be of harm to other people, e.g. in attempts to prevent mass shootings, terrorist attacks, the watch over and conduct surveillance on people suspected of espionage(in a reasonable right, as not everyone should be expected of espionage). Privacy has lines. Lines that both sides should acknowledge and adhere to unless absolutely necessary. A person  is free to do and act however they may please, but, the lives and privacy of others need also be taken into account.
	“Privacy is dead, get over it.” I feel this quote, as said by Scott McNealy is very accurate in today’s world. There is no real privacy on the internet anymore. With hackers, such as Anonymous, spam, and the simple fact people don’t protect themselves enough. In my opinion there is no privacy left on the world wide web. People rarely care anymore, ignoring the privacy updates and continuing uses on websites they’ve come accustomed to. Despite the outings of Google and Facebook in the NSA’s data collection, no one has turned their back on them. Users may value their privacy, and if they knew how little privacy they really had, how much would the average person care?
	
	

[1] Defn; Privacy, Oxford English Dictionary, 1978
[2] The Right to Privacy by Samuel D. Warren & Louis D. Brandeis, Harvard Law Review (December 15, 1890)
[3] uknown author, http://www.privacilla.org/business/privacytorts.html
[4] Available at: http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights#
[5] Knight, Judson (2004) Privacy: Legal and Ethical Issues, Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence, and Security, Available at 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3403300618.html [Accessed 5th December 2015]
[6] Avaiable at: http://samy.pl/evercookie/ 
[7] Richie, Rene.(2015) Giving up on Google, iMore, June 1st. Available at http://www.imore.com/giving-up-on-google [Accessed 3rd December 2015]
[8] Lillington, Karlin. (2015) Is Facebook facing up to privacy and security concerns?, Irish Times, July 16th. Available at: 
http://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/is-facebook-facing-up-to-privacy-and-security-concerns-1.2285942[Accessed 5th December 2015]
[9] Morgan, Jacob (2014)  Privacy Is Completely And Utterly Dead, And We Killed It, Forbes-Leadership, August 19th, Available at
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacobmorgan/2014/08/19/privacy-is-completely-and-utterly-dead-and-we-killed-it/  [Accessed 5th December 2015]




